An automation client project is any project that connects to the
Atomist development automation API.  The reference implementation of
the automation client is the [automation-client-ts][client-ts]
project, which is written in [TypeScript][ts].  The combination of
TypeScript and [GraphQL][gql] provides an excellent development
experience, with excellent tooling and debugging support.  This
section documents creating a new TypeScript automation client project
and the structure and organization of typical automation client
projects written in TypeScript.

[client-ts]: https://github.com/atomist/automation-client-ts (Atomist Automation Client - TypeScript)
[ts]: https://www.typescriptlang.org/ (TypeScript)
[gql]: http://graphql.org/ (GraphQL)

## Creating a Client Project

There are a few ways to create a new automation client project.  We
suggest using the [automation-seed-ts][seed] project as a seed for
your automation client project.

Before creating a project using Slack or the Atomist CLI,
{!prereq-items.md!}


### Slack

```
@atomist generate automation-client
```

### Command Line

You can use the Atomist CLI to create a new automation project from
the automation-seed-ts project.  Run the following command, replacing
`PROJECT_NAME` with the name of your new project.

```
atomist execute NewAutomation —name=PROJECT_NAME
```

### GitHub

If you prefer the manual route, fixing up the project metadata
yourself, you can always just fork the [automation-seed-ts][seed]
project on GitHub.

[seed]: https://github.com/atomist/automation-seed-ts (Atomist Automation Client Seed Project)

## Project Structure

Automation client projects are organized and behave like any standard
TypeScript project.

### package.json

The `package.json` file defines the metadata and dependencies for the
project.  In addition, this file defines the standard "NPM package
scripts", i.e., `npm run` commands, typically available in Node.js
projects.  Here's a summary of the NPM package scripts available in
most automation client projects.

Command | Description
------- | ------
`npm install` | install all the required packages
`npm run autostart` | run the client, refreshing when files change
`npm run autotest` | run tests every time files change
`npm run build` | lint, compile, and test
`npm run clean` | remove stray compiled JavaScript files and build directory
`npm run compile` | compile all TypeScript into JavaScript
`npm run fmt` | run tsfmt on TypeScript files
`npm run lint` | run tslint against the TypeScript
`npm run lint:fix` | run `tslint --fix` against the TypeScript
`npm start` | start the Atomist automation client
`npm test` | run tests

### build

The `build` directory contains the JavaScript sources output from
TypeScript compilation.

### config

The `config` directory is optional, used only when you use
the [config][config-js] Node.js package.

[config-js]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/config (Node-config)

### graphql

The `graphql` directory contains `.graphql` files defining
your [GraphQL][gql] queries, subscriptions, and mutations.  This
directory is optional, as you can define your GraphQL in strings
within the source code.  That said, it is recommended that you define
your GraphQL in `.graphql` files so you can realize the full benefit
of its type bindings in TypeScript.

### node_modules

The `node_modules` directory contains all the project dependencies, as
defined in the `package.json` and installed by NPM.

### scripts

The `scripts` directory contains various ancillary scripts.  For
example, this directory might have scripts for building the project on
CI, publishing the project as an Node.js package, and publishing the
projects [TypeDoc][typedoc].

[typedoc]: http://typedoc.org/ (TypeDoc)

### src

The `src` directory contains the TypeScript source code.

#### handlers

The `src/handlers` directory contains the source code for command and
event handlers.

##### command

The `src/handlers/command` directory contains the source code for bot
commands.

##### event

The `src/handlers/event` directory contains the source code for event
automations.

#### typings

The `src/typings` directory contains the autogenerated TypeScript
types for your GraphQL queries, subscriptions, and mutations.

### test

The `test` directory contains the automated tests for the project.
Typically these are unit tests written using [mocha][]
and [power-assert][].

[mocha]: https://mochajs.org/ (Mocha)
[power-assert]: https://github.com/power-assert-js/power-assert#readme (power-assert)

<!--
## Debugging with Visual Studio Code
-->
